'\" t
.\" Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 Stefano Falsetto
.\" Copyright (C) 2008 D E Evans
.\"
.\" This file is part of GNU rottlog.
.\"
.\" See section COPYING for conditions for redistribution
.\"
'\" t

.TH ROTTLOG "8" "September 2008" "GNU Rot[t]log" "System Administrator's Manual"
.SH NAME
GNU Rot[t]log \- A log management utility
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rottlog [options]
.SH DESCRIPTION
GNU Rot[t]log is the GNU log management utility. It was originally
authored in 2000 by Stefano Falsetto on Slackware to rotate his logs. It
was later added in 2002 to Savannah to become a GNU Project.
.SH OPTIONS
.HP
\fB\-\-help\fR, \fB\-h\fR
.IP
Display usage summary and descriptions
.HP
\fB\-\-version\fR, \fB\-V\fR
.IP
Display version, disclaimer, and exit
.HP
\fB\-\-defaults\fR
.IP
Display default values and exit
.HP
\fB\-\-showlog\fR <logfile>, \fB\-s\fR <logfile>
.IP
Show with a pager (un)compressed archived logs
.HP
\fB\-\-pager\fR <program>
.IP
Use <program> for paging output of showlog
.HP
\fB\-\-summary\fR <logfile>
.IP
Display a summary of some useful information about <logfile>
.HP
\fB\-\-checkrc\fR <what>,<what>,...
.IP
Check for syntax of specified configuration file(s)
<what> must be one of: daily, weekly, monthly, custom, all
.HP
\fB\-\-force\fR [<what>]
.IP
Force rotation/archiving of all entries in <what> config file
and subsequent period\-related config files.
<what> must be one of: daily, weekly, monthly
Rotation/archiving of all logfiles will be forced if <what>
is not used.
.HP
\fB\-\-forceonly\fR [<what>]
.IP
Force rotation/archiving of all entries only in <what> config
file. See \fB\-\-force\fR option for more information.
.HP
\fB\-\-debug\fR
.IP
Let rottlog to be verbose.
.SH COPYING
Copyright \(co 2001, 2002 by Stefano Falsetto
.br
Copyright \(co 2008 by D E Evans
.PP
Permission is granted to copy, distribute or modify this document
(or both) under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
Version 1.3, or any later version published by the Free Software
Foundation; with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts,
and no Back-Cover Texts.  

.SH "SEE ALSO"
The full documentation for
.B rottlog
is maintained as a Texinfo manual.  If the
.B info
and
.B rottlog
programs are properly installed at your site, the command
.IP
.B info rottlog
.PP
should give you access to the complete manual.

